



Why do the prices of branded medicines vary so much by brand in India when the content is same?

For example, there are 12 different brands offering the exact same thing Digoxin and the price ranges from 20 paise 
per tablet (brand name Digox by Cadila)  to nearly 2 rupees per tablet (brand name Lanoxin by Glaxo).
 
Source: http://www.medguideindia.com



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Apart from the earlier answer, there are a couple of points that need to be considered
1) A medicine is not just made of the active ingredients which are mentioned in the constituents.
Along with the active constituent major bulk of the medicine is made up of chemicals/additives that affect the
stability and absorption of the medicine. This can significantly affect the effectiveness of the medicine.
2) Many companies distribute the cost of research of new drugs to its existing drugs to sustain in the market. 
Pharmaceutical Industry is highly research oriented and without funds it would not be able to sustain. Hence mostly 
the companies which are actually involved in research may charge more, while copy makers can charge cheap. Both the 
groups of companies are important to the Indian context.
3) From the business perspective, the rates may vary based on the strategy being deployed by the company. Some companies 
are focused on certain areas for the sale of the medicines. They do not have the volumes but cater to markets that the bulk
manufactures cannot reach. For such companies to sustain, the medicines may be charged at a premium.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Typically, pharma companies charge different prices because they can! (*as long as there is no price control imposed on that drug) 

A detour about the normal life of a drug:

When a drug is introduced into the market, it is usually under a patent that has a life of about 10 years remaining.
During this period, the company that holds the patent for the drug can charge whatever price they want for the drug 
(the price covered by insurance especially in more developed markets like the US is usually "negotiated" lower price
because the insurance providers have more leverage)

In India, any drug that is not deemed critical and isn't under price control, is also allowed this freedom. 

Now the part that is often missed: The reason why the patent holding pharma company charges high prices 
(>90% gross margins) for such a drug is related to the R&D costs that go into drug discovery. In order to obtain
a "blockbuster" drug (often defined as a drug with potential >$1 bn annual sales), the pharma company has to suffer 
multiple misses; IIRC a success rate of <10%. In order to break even on these misses, the pharma company has to price
at what seems like high margin prices.

Post the patent expiry, any pharma company can manufacture and sell the drug. Such a drug is then called a generic and
the companies that produce only generics (and do limited drug discovery) are called generic manufacturers/producers. 
With lower R&D, generic producers can charge lower prices for the generic drugs than the price charged during the patent
period. Now, theoretically, pricing is competitive and determined by market forces and hence should correct over time.

This is where we get to the question: why then are prices ranging such a spectrum and not converting to a single (lower) price?

My guess is that drugs that have created a name/brand for themselves during the patent period will capitalize on this and 
charge higher than competitor products, even if the constituents are the same. Similar to any other branded product? I guess,
except the brand awareness is more at the doctor level rather than the consumer level! How many of us know which drug is
patented and which is generic, let alone what options exist, if any? We rely mostly on our doctors' prescriptions.

So, are some pharma companies at fault for pricing higher than generic producers? Legally, no for sure but ethically, 
maybe but more likely no IMHO. Not surely yes because if free markets are trusted then the price should correct to the 
"right" level. The information asymmetry that is only somewhat under the pharma company's control skews the free market 
correction. So maybe it is the Goverment's role to fill in this void by awareness building or as in the SMJ episode by
setting up generic pharma retailer outlets.

PS: What about doctors who prescribe and pharma retailers that sell higher priced drugs when cheaper exist? Somewhere
between ignorance and greed. Hopefully more of the former.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I work in a pharma company and I asked my boss this question. He said that ours is a reputed company and people expect our
products to be at a premium. They think the medicine is better if the price is more. 

Also most pharma companies have outsourced their manufacturing to a third party. Now the best pharma companies pick the best
of the produce say a grade A medicine and a generic company may pick a grade C medicine. The grades are purely subjective and
signify the intangible aspects like quick acceptance by body and solvents and diluents involved. Thus the manufacturing cost 
is different for companies having same combination. 

And thus there is a price difference.
